1. ls  - checking folders in current directory -l will a long list format to help you see permissions

2. pwd - gives you your current working directory 

3. cd - moves you in and out of directories eg cd documents

4. mkdir- makes a directory or folder within your current working directory 

5. mv - moves files or directories to different directories 

6. cp - copies a file

7. rm - removes or deleted files or directories. It is difficult to recover after deletion, especially for those without a recycle bin set up on their system .

8. touch - changes file access and modifies timestamps. If the file doesn't exist that you are looking for, it will create a new one

9. ln - creates links between files, either hard or symbolic. All files are hard links by default  but creating a link allows you to have multiple names for a file.
Symlinks are very useful for creating shortcuts and managing files and directories located in different parts of the file system.
They also retain their link even if the target is moved or renamed, as long as it remains within the same filesystem

10. clear - clears your terminal screen 

11. cat - concatenates or combines files eg. cat file1.txt file2.txt > combined.txt

12. echo -  is used for displaying simple text or variable values, debugging scripts, and concatenating elements into files using redirection
eg. echo "Sample text" > file.txt

13. less - used to read large files in chunks instead of all at once

14. man - displays commands available 

15. uname - prints available system information such as processor, operating system and hardware

16. whoami - tells you if you are operating as root or another user in the terminal 

17. tar - useful for creating backups and archiving files

18. grep - searches for patterns in your data
     -i: Ignores case (i.e., treats uppercase and lowercase as equivalent). 
     -v: Inverts the match, so it shows only the lines that do not match the pattern.
     -n: Displays the line number along with the text of each matching line.
     -r or -R: Recursively search through directories.
     -E: Allows the use of extended regular expressions, which enables more complex patterns.
 Eg. grep -i "disk" system.log would search for the word disk in the system logs but it would ignore case of letters

19. head- gets the first 10 of logs files or any file

20. tail- gets the last updated log files or any files
Eg. tail -f /var/log/syslog | grep "error" looks specifically for error log files and continually monitors logins, the -f follows the file 

21. diff- finds the differences between two files line by line

22. cmp- compares files bit by bit

23. comm -compares sorted files

24. sort - arranges alphabetically or numerically
eg. sort unsorted.txt > sorted.txt

25. export -sets or exports the environment variable.
eg.export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/bin

26. zip - compresses files into a zip archive

27. unzip- unzips files froma a zip archive

28. ssh- used to securely execute commands, transfer files, and forward ports on a remote machine
eg.ssh username@host

29. service -used to start, stop, or restart system services
eg service apache2 restart

20. ps-  displays information about active processes

31. kill and killall -kill sends a signal to a specific process, while killall sends a signal to all processes by name
eg.kill 1234
killall firefox

32. df-monitors disk usage

33. mount - helpful in forensics to mount a disk, essential in forensics to access filesystems of an evidence disk without altering the data
eg. mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/forensic

34. chmod - useful to change permissions
eg.chmod 755 script.sh

35. chown -change the ownership of files or directories

36. ifconfig -configure, manage, and query network interface parameters


37. traceroute- shows the route packets take to a network host,  used to diagnose network routing issues

38. wget -used to download files from the internet

39. ufw - a user-friendly frontend for managing iptables firewall rules
eg.ufw allow from 192.168.1.1 to any port 22

40. iptables-set up, maintain, and inspect the tables of IP packet filter rules
eg.iptables -A INPUT -i eth0 -p tcp --dport 80 -j ACCEPT

41. apt, pacman, yum, rpm - install and update, and manage software on machine

42. sudo - allows you to act as root when your user doesn't have permissions 

43. cal - a command-line utility that displays a calendar in the terminal

44. alias - creates a shorthand for a longer command line, making it easier to remember and execute
eg.alias ll='ls -l'

45. dd - used to copy block-level data directly from one device to another, useful for making disk images or backups
eg.dd if=/dev/sda of=/dev/sdb bs=512 , command clones one drive to another using a block size of 512 bytes


46. whereis -helps in finding the location of executables, source codes, and man pages within the system

47. whatis -provides a quick summary of what a command does

48. top - is used for monitoring system processes and their resource consumption like CPU and memory

49. useradd- this extremely important if you are wanting to create a new user for your computer or virtual machine
eg. sudo useradd username

50. passwd -  is used to update a user's password. It's a critical security tool for managing user authentication
